CLEAR CLIMATE CODE RELEASE NOTES FOR RELEASE 0.6.x

Nick Barnes, Climate Code Foundation
David Jones, Climate Code Foundation

$Date$


CONTENTS

  1. Introduction
  2. Getting help
  3. What's fixed
     3.1.   What's fixed in release 0.6.1
     3.2.   What was fixed in release 0.6.0
     3.3.   What was fixed in release 0.5.1
     3.4.   What was fixed in release 0.5.0
     3.5.   What was fixed in release 0.4.1
     3.6.   What was fixed in release 0.4.0
     3.7.   What was fixed in release 0.3.0
     3.8.   What was fixed in release 0.2.0
     3.9.   What was fixed in release 0.1.0
     3.10.  What was fixed in release 0.0.3
     3.11   What was fixed in release 0.0.2
     3.12.  What was fixed in release 0.0.1
     3.13.  What was fixed in release 0.0.0
  A. References
  B. Document history
  C. Copyright and license


1. INTRODUCTION

These are the release notes for release 0.6.x of the Clear Climate
Code GISTEMP project (ccc-gistemp).

Clear Climate Code have reimplemented GISTEMP (the GISS surface
temperature analysis system), to make it clearer.  Work continues
towards making it more clear and more accessible.

For instructions on installing and running ccc-gistemp, see the
product readme (readme.txt).

For up-to-date information about releases of ccc-gistemp see the
project home page <http://clearclimatecode.org/>.  From there you will
find links to the latest releases, including reports of defects found.


2. GETTING HELP

If you have problems with CCC, please feel free to contact
support@clearclimatecode.org.


3. WHAT'S FIXED

This section lists defects that have been fixed.


3.1. WHAT'S FIXED IN RELEASE 0.6.x

(essentially a repeat of Issue 88) After a period of neglect,
ccc-gistemp had decayed. ccc-gistemp failed to download the
GISTEMP sources (which contain data and tables used by
ccc-gistemp), and it failed to download the SST file (which had
in any case been switch from Hadley--Reynolds to Smith ERSST). Both of
these have been fixed. SST data now comes from Smith et al's
2008 Extended Reconstructed SST.


3.2. WHAT'S FIXED IN RELEASE 0.6.1


Issue 88: Fresh download and run does not work.

A bug where an attempt to read v2.inv file was made before it had
downloaded.  Consequently, running ccc-gistemp with from scratch, with
no previously downloaded data, did not work (but running it again
immediately worked).  This is now fixed.


3.3. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.6.0


Issue 68: Running step 4 alone crashes

Ocean-only estimates are now possible: tool/run.py -s 4,5


Issue 75: labels for trend lines are not clear

This refers to the charts produced by tool/vischeck.py and which
sometimes feature on the blog.  The labels have been clarified.


Issue 76: Some GHCN stations (in the US) are bogusly dropped.

ccc-gistemp was dropping data from GHCN stations that were in the US but
had no USHCN counterpart.  Now it retains the data from these stations
(there are very few).


Issue 77: Not possible to re-run a land-only analysis without running Step 3 again.

It is now possible to run a land-only analysis with tool/run.py -s 3c,5
(assuming that steps 0 to 3 have previously been run).


Issue 79: Not possible to skip contiguous US GHCN stations.

Official GISTEMP implements a feature whereby GHCN data from the
contiguous US is dropped.  Now we do too (see "retain_contiguous_US" in
parameters.py).


Issue 80: Not possible to set parameters from the command line.

You can now set parameters without having to edit parameters.py. 
tool/run.py -p 'retain_contiguous_US=False;data_sources=ghcn,scar,hohenpeissenberg'


Issue 81: Cannot use land mask

It is useful to restrict the land analysis to certain sets of cells (via
a land mask); this is now possible.


Issue 82: Cannot use USHCN min/max temperature data.

It is now possible to use "min" and "max" data (not just "mean") from
USHCN.  This was implemented for a particular project, but may be of
wider use.


Issue 83: Crashes when all data is before 2000-01

If the input data only went up to 1999 (say) then ccc-gistemp would
crash.  Now it works.


Issue 84: List of retained stations differs between releases.

Various bugs meant that some stations (a very small minority) were
being incorrectly retained or dropped.  Fixed.


Issue 85: Should use GHCN v3.

By specifying 'v3' as a data source it is possibly to do a preliminary
analysis using GHCN v3.


3.4. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.5.1


Issue 73: Problem downloading input files on Python 2.5 (.1?)

A tarfile problem prevented ccc-gistemp working in Python 2.5.1 (quite
an old version of Python now).  This is now fixed.


3.5. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.5.0


Issue 47: try:yield:finally breaks on Python 2.4

Having fixed this issue, ccc-gistemp now runs (again) on Python 2.4


Issue 63: Recent Hohenpeissenberg data can be displaced by a year.

In principle certain GHCN data for station 61710962000 could be
handled incorrectly (if a duplicate other than '2' had recent data).  In
practice this never happened, but the bug could be provoked by feeding
specially prepared synthetic data.  This bug has been eliminated.


Issue 65: Preflight fails with new GISTEMP source archive

GISS changed the internal details of the GISTEMP source tarfile
that they publish; we download certain data directly from the tarball,
and our code to do this broke when the tarball changed.  Now fixed.


Issue 70: Series sometimes have early parts truncated when writing to file.

A bug in writing intermediate files could cause a few months of data to
be lost.  This never affected the main use of ccc-gistemp because data
was not passed via intermediate files since 0.4.0, but it could affect
processing if one started a run with step 3.  In any case it would have
almost no noticeable affect on the results.


Issue 71: v2.step2.out missing partial years.

This is the visible manifestation of Issue 70.  The intermediate output
file from Step 2 would be missing some partial years.  This file is
never used in ordinary processing.


Issue 72: Large unclear functions in Step 2

Step 2 (peri-urban adjustment) had several large functions that were
also unclear.  This step has now been made more clear by abstracting
more code into smaller functions, and simplifying and clarifying many of
those functions.


3.6. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.4.1


Issue 59: tool/regression.py is broken by removing a module

Shortly before release 0.4.0, we removed a module
code/script_support.py, as it was no longer used by the other code in
the code/ directory.  However, it was still used by our regression
test tool/regression.py.  We have reworked tool/regression.py so it no
longer uses this module.


3.7. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.4.0


Issue 56: Code is unclear due to Fortran style

Almost all of our code has now been rewritten to remove the Fortran
style which remained from the original conversion from GISTEMP.
Previous releases had greatly improved steps 0-2; this release
continues the improvement work there and also carries those
improvements through steps 3-5.  Almost all of our Python code now has
sensible variable and function names, clearer data handling, and
helpful comments.  Many unused variables and functions have been
removed.


Issue 50: Data are rounded unnecessarily in internal processing.

Rounding was used to exactly emulate the Fortran GISTEMP.  Rounding
made the code less clear, and Dr Reto Ruedy of NASA GISS confirmed
that rounding was not important to the algorithm, so it has been
removed.  All temperature data is now handled internally as floating
point degrees Celsius (previously it was a mixture of integer tenths,
floating point tenths, and floating point degrees) and all location
information is handled as floating point degrees latitude and
longitude (previously it was a mixture of floating point degrees and
integer hundredths).


Issue 51: Data are passed between steps in intermediate files.

Much of GISTEMP is concerned with generating and consuming
intermediate files, to separate phases and to avoid keeping the whole
dataset in memory at once (an important consideration when GISTEMP was
originally written).  We have now completely replaced this with an
in-memory pipeline, which is clearer, automatically pipelines all the
processing where possible, and avoids all code concerned with
serialization and deserialization.

We have retained code to generate intermediate files between the
distinct steps of the GISTEMP algorithm, and to allow running a step
from an intermediate file instead of in a pipeline.  This allows the
running of single steps, and is useful for testing purposes.


Issue 52: Difficult to change some obvious parameters.

Parameters like the 1200 km radius used when gridding, and the number,
3, of rural stations required to adjust an urban station, were
scattered throughout the code.  Almost all of these have now been
placed in code/parameters.py where they can be changed more easily.


Issue 53: Core algorithm is mixed with input/output.

All code concerned with file input/output has been moved to the tool/
directory; the "core GISTEMP algorithm" stays in the code/ directory.
The code here is now smaller and clearer as a result.


Issue 45: Does not produce land-only index

It's now possible to omit Step 4 and produce a land-only index.  It
matches GISTEMP.


Issue 54: Selection of urban stations does not match GISTEMP.

GISTEMP recently switched to using nighttime brightness to determine
urban/rural stations.  We made the corresponding change. (see also Issue
7)


Issue 17: Decompressing input files is slow.

We now get input files in zip or gz format which we can decompress. on
the fly, quickly.


Issue 43: Problem when sigma is 0.

Some possible inputs to the "sigma" routine in step1.py could cause an
exception (due to taking the square root of a negative number).  This
never occurred with actual data, and now the problem has been
eliminating by rewriting the calculation.


3.8. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.3.0


Issue 24: Doesn't work with Python 2.4

The Python 2.4 tarfile library doesn't support some tarfiles,
apparently including those produced by the tar program used by some
scientists.  So fetching GISTEMP station tables breaks.  We added a
fixed tarfile library to the tool/ directory to work around this.


Issue 26: fetch.py failure with Python 2.5.1

Python 2.5.1, which is shipped with Mac OS X 10.5 so is widely used,
has a defect in the tarfile library which broke our code for fetching
NCAR Antarctic data and GISTEMP station tables.  We added a workaround.


Issue 25: Step 2 pointlessly splits station record data into 6 zonal files.

code/split_binary.py was called to split Ts.bin into 6 zonal files,
each of which was then processed in turn by all the programs in step
2.  step 3 then expected these 6 files as input.

This emulated the GISS GISTEMP code and was presumably once necessary
in order to do the analysis with very little RAM.  That is no longer a
concern.  It reduced clarity and added complexity to the run
environment ("What are all these files?").


Issue 30: Step 2 uses several intermediate files      

Step 2 created several files to pass data between phases within the
step.  Even after the resolution of issue 25, there were still 5 files
created and consumed solely within this step: Ts.bin, Ts.GHCN.CL,
ANN.dTs.GHCN.CL, PApars.pre-flags, PApars.list.  Some of these were in
Fortran binary format, others in plain text.  There was quite a bit of
code for writing and reading these files.

All of the data flow between phases in this step is now by Python
iterator instead, which firstly reduces code complexity and secondly
causes the code to be automatically pipelined.


Issue 29: step 1 uses BSD db intermediate files

step1.py generated a number of intermediate files in the BSD database
format.  This added complexity to the code and to the run environment,
and caused a dependency on the bsddb module (which will be removed in
some future Python).  All data-flow between phases within the step now
takes place via Python iterators, which removes the complexity and
also causes the code to be naturally and transparently pipelined.


Issue 32: step 1 includes overly complex object class       

step1.py was partly cut-and-paste from Python already in GISTEMP.  It
included an object class called StationString, which largely existed
to serialize and deserialize station temperature records for storage
in database files (see issue 29 ).  This has be replaced by a simple
dictionary of metadata and a list-of-arrays data series.


Issue 33: step 1's simple phases clarified         

Step 1 consists of four phases, comb_records(), comb_pieces(),
drop_strange() and alter_discont().  The latter two phases are much
simpler than the former, and have been greatly clarified and somewhat
documented.  Progress has also been made on the first two phases, but
they are still somewhat mysterious.


Issue 34: step 2 was opaque and confusing         

STEP 2 of the GISTEMP algorithm performs an adjustment to compensate for
the urban heat island effect.  The code to do this was quite opaque and
confusing: masses of arithmetic, poorly named functions and variables, huge
shared arrays, complex control flow, some obscure data dependencies, and
hardly any comments.

All the STEP 2 code, now consolidated into step2.py, is clarified and
documented.  Control flow has been greatly simplified in several places. 
Almost all variables and functions have been renamed.  Every function has
accompanying documentation.  There is hardly any global data or shared
lists or arrays.


Issue 31: Result comparison should give much more detail           

The compare_results script was improved in numerous ways:
- x-axis labelling was sometimes broken;
- very small values were reported as zero;
- bar charts were not useful when all the values were small;
- the sizes of datasets were not reported;
- the numbers of zero residues were not reported;
- per-box standard deviations were not reported.

The improved script fixes all of these, and even draws a crude coloured map
to indicated the distribution of residual standard deviations.


Issue 35: No regression test against NASA GISTEMP           

There was no way to perform a regression test against NASA's GISTEMP. 
Happily Dr Reto Ruedy of GISS has provided us with input data and result
files from a live run of GISTEMP, and we have already developed a good
script for graphical and statistical comparison of result files (see  issue
31 ), so we were able to write a regression test which fetches these input
files, runs ccc-gistemp on them, and compares the results with NASA's.


Issue 23: Cannot use --steps 3

An omission in run.py prevented the standalone running of step 3 of
the algorithm.


Issue 28: vischeck complains when given a single URL

An internal program to generate Google Chart URLs broke under some
circumstances.


3.9. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.2.0

Issue 19: STEP2 is in Fortran

Paul Ollis rewrote the STEP2 code in Python.

Issue 10: STEP5 is in Fortran

David Jones rewrote the STEP5 code in Python.

Issue 9: STEP4 is in Fortran

Paul Ollis rewrote the STEP4 code in Python, removing the last Fortran
from CCC-GISTEMP.

Issue 1: Does not work on Windows

Gareth Rees rewrote the driver script in Python, so we no longer have
a dependency on any shell, and can run on Windows with or without
cygwin.  John Keyes and Richard Hendricks were very helpful in
diagnosing and testing this on various Windows platforms.

Issue 7: Out-of-date with respect to GISTEMP

Various changes have been made to GISTEMP since we started this
project.  Nick Barnes ported those changes over to our code.  The most
significant change was the use of version 2 of the USHCN dataset.

Issue 20: Source data has to be fetched and uncompressed by hand

David Jones wrote a fetch module and a preflight checking module, to
fetch all the input data from the originating organisations.

Issue 21: No way to compare results

David Jones wrote vischeck.py, which will generate a graph comparing
the annual global temperature anomalies from two sets of result data
(e.g. comparing CCC-GISTEMP with GISTEMP).  Gareth Rees wrote
compare_results.py, which generates a more detailed report comparing
two sets of results.

3.10. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.1.0

ESSENTIAL

job001914: GISTEMP relies on ksh

All the driver scripts in GISTEMP are written in ksh.  Nothing ships
with ksh, and it's moderately hard to install a working version of it on
(for instance) FreeBSD.  This reduces the utility of CCC GISTEMP to the
public: they need to go and get an obscure tool, and install it.


job001916: No single driver script in GISTEMP.

The GISTEMP downloadable sources (in CCC version 0.0) do not come with a
single script to drive the whole process.  There are several driver
scripts (e.g. STEP0/do_comb_step0.sh) and a top-level gistemp.txt
description of the process, supplemented by instructive messages
produced by each driver script as it runs.  This is not very accessible
to interested members of the public.


job001917: STEP0 is in FORTRAN

STEP 0 of the GISTEMP code is in FORTRAN.  This makes it unclear to the
public.


job001919: STEP3 is in FORTRAN

STEP 3 of the GISTEMP code is in FORTRAN.  This makes it unclear to the
public.


job001922: STEP 1 is in FORTRAN

STEP 1 of the GISTEMP code is in FORTRAN.  This makes it unclear to the
public.


OPTIONAL

job001915: GISTEMP has no graphical output

The GISTEMP sources as distributed by GISS don't have any graphical
outputs.  Some basic graphical output would be very useful for
sanity-checking during development.


job001923: GISTEMP data files don't have consistent locations

GISTEMP reads source data files from directories mostly called
STEP*/input_files/, writes intermediate files in */work_files/, writes
some log files into */log/, output files in */out/, archived files in
*/old/, and so on.  Configuration files also live in /input_files/.
Files have to be moved manually between steps in between running the
separate step driver scripts.  Executables live adjacent to the source
code. It's all a bit of a mess.


3.11. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.0.3


ESSENTIAL

job001910: STEP2 infinite loop on some platforms

The PApars.f part of GISTEMP STEP2 runs forever, when compiled with GNU
Fortran 4.2.5 20080702 on FreeBSD 6.3.


OPTIONAL

job001911: PApars algorithm unclear

GISTEMP STEP2/PApars.f has quite a lot of old FORTRAN code which is
obscure.  The large header comment is also incorrect in places.


3.12. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.0.2


ESSENTIAL

job001909: GISTEMP STEP0 discards the final digit of every USHCN datum

The GISTEMP STEP0 code which reads the USHCN temperature records and
converts them to the GISTEMP v2.mean format fails to read the full width
of each datum.  Each datum occupies 6 columns in the data file (-99.99
to 999.99), but only the first five columns are read and converted to a
float.  This was detected by the Clear Climate Code project in
diagnosing a difference between the output of the FORTRAN STEP0 and
Python step0.py.


3.13. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.0.1


ESSENTIAL

job001907: Python EXTENSIONS directory is compressed

GISTEMP includes STEP1/EXTENSIONS.tar.gz.  To run GISTEMP, following the
instructions in PYTHON_README.txt, one needs an uncompressed directory.


job001908: CCC readme and release notes are patchy

CCC version 0.0 is GISTEMP as released by GISS; release 0.0.0 was
GISTEMP as released on 2007-10-10.  The packaging materials (readme and
release notes) for 0.0.0 were cloned poorly from the P4DTI project and
need generally sprucing up before 0.0.1 or 0.1.0.


OPTIONAL

job001906: Python scripts use bad path in shebang

The Python scripts in GISTEMP STEP1 use /gcm/jglascoe/bin/python as the
path to Python in the "shebang" #! first line of the file.  This is not
very portable to say the least.


3.14. WHAT WAS FIXED IN RELEASE 0.0.0


Nothing.  Release 0.0.0 is just GISTEMP as released on 2007-10-10,
plus readme.txt and release-notes.txt.


A. REFERENCES

None.


B. DOCUMENT HISTORY

Most recent changes first:

2010-08-29 DRJ Updated for 0.6.1.
2010-08-22 DRJ Updated for 0.6.0.
2010-07-21 DRJ Updated for 0.5.1.
2010-07-19 DRJ Updated for 0.5.0.
2010-03-11 NB  Updated for 0.4.1.
2010-03-09 DRJ Updated for 0.4.0.
2010-01-26 NB  Updated for 0.3.0.
2010-01-11 NB  Updated for 0.2.0.
2009-12-03 NB  Updated for GoogleCode project.
2008-09-14 NB  Updated for 0.1.0
2008-09-12 NB  Updated for 0.0.3
2008-09-12 NB  Updated for 0.0.2
2008-09-11 NB  Updated for 0.0.1
2008-09-08 NB  Created.


C. COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This document is copyright (C) 2009, 2010 Ravenbrook Limited; and (C)
2010 Climate Code Foundation.  All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use of this document in any form, with or without
modification, is permitted provided that redistributions of this
document retain the above copyright notice, this condition and the
following disclaimer.

THIS DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS
IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
DOCUMENT, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

$URL$
$Rev$

