$URL$
$Rev$

David Jones, Climate Code Foundation, 2010-11-19


Overview of ccc-gistemp

ccc-gistemp is a software product written in the Python programming
language.  It is a replication of GISTEMP.  GISTEMP (and hence
ccc-gistemp) is a reconstruction of global historical temperature
anomalies, and is described by its author's at NASA on their webpage:
http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/ .  ccc-gistemp is a product of the
Clear Climate Code project and the Climate Code Foundation.  It attempts
to do exactly the same thing that GISTEMP does, but with an emphasis on
making the code clear.

Broadly the GISTEMP algorithm takes historical temperature data from
land-based weather stations as input, and combines these data to
produce an estimate of temperature change over large regions.  In
addition, sea surface temperate data (which has already been processed
to some extent) can be combined with land station data.

This document provides an overview of the algorithm, and in particular
attemts to link the high level organisation of the algorithm with its
published description in the scientific literature.

The key GISTEMP paper is Hansen and Lebedeff 1987 which describes the
basic gridding scheme.  There have been many modifications to the
algorithm since then, but a recent review of GISTEMP, Hansen et al
2010, documents most of those parts that are not in the 1987 paper
(collecting documentation that was previously scattered about many
different publications).


Algorithm

The GISTEMP algorithm (and hence ccc-gistemp) is organised as a series
of steps.  Data flows through the steps in a pipeline.  Early steps
deal with station records, later steps grid the data before final
large area averages are computed.  The steps are:

Step 0: Assimilates input data from various sources (usually GHCN,
USHCN, SCAR READER, and a single priv. comm. record for
Hohenpeissenberg).  Each USHCN record is adjusted so that its recent
seasonal cycle matches the recent seasonal cycle for the corresponding
GHCN record (not documented in the literature).  GHCN data for
Hohenpeissenberg is replaced with priv.  comm. data (not documented in
the literature).  Hansen et al 2010 documents the use of SCAR READER
data.

Step 1: A feature of GHCN (a major data source) is that a single
station can have multiple overlapping records (from different original
sources).  These are reconciled where possible, by offsetting
overlapping records by their average difference, and combining them
into one record.  Two stations (Lihue and St Helena) are adjusted to
remove a step change in the record.  Under the control of a
configuration file, various stations and periods of station records are
discarded (as being unfit for subsequent analysis).  Hansen et al 1999
documents the QC procedures that lead to discarding station data; it
also documents the Lihue and St Helena adjustment (also documented in
Hansen et al 2010); and it documents the method by which multiple
records at the same location are combined.  Some of the discarded
stations in the US are documented in Hansen et al 2001.

Step 2: Urban Adjustment.  (short records are discarded). Stations
identified as urban (usually using values obtained from satellite
measurements of nighttime brightness) have their trend adjusted to
match the trend of a composite record made from nearby rural stations.
At least 2/3 of the adjusted period must have 3 rural stations
contributing to the composite record.  Periods and stations that do
not have sufficient support from rural stations are dropped.  The
composite rural record is made from rural stations with 500 km, or
1000 km if necessary to meet the sufficient stations requirement.
This step is documented in Hansen et al 1999 (the basic scheme),
Hansen et al 2001 (allowing the break point in a two leg fit to vary in
time), and Hansen et al 2010 (the use of satellite nightlights).

Step 3: Gridding.  A grid of cells is selected (8000 equal area cells
covering the globe, see note below), and for each cell a composite
series is computed from station records within 1200 km of the cell
centre.  Each contributing record is weighted according to its
distance from the cell centre, linearly decreasing to 0 at a distance
of 1200 km.  This step is documented in Hansen and Lebedeff 1987.

Step 4: Sea Surface Temperatures.  Gridded sea surface temperatures
are read from a file prepared by GISS using data from other published
sources and possibly revised with recent monthly updates.  Sea
surface temperature data are only used if the location is ice free
all year, data from locations containing sea ice are discarded.
This step is documented in Hansen et al 2010 (and possibly elsewhere).

Step 5: Ocean merging.  Ocean (Sea Surface Temperatures) and Land
(Near Surface Air Temperatures) are "merged".  A cell that has both
ocean and land records selects either the ocean or the land record:
the land record is discarded unless the ocean record is short or
the land record has a contributing land station within 100 km (in
which case the ocean record is discarded).  This part is documented
in Hansen et al 1996.  In ccc-gistemp in order to produce three analyses
for land-only, ocean-only, and combined land--ocean, three maps of cells
are produced and go forward to the following Zonal and Global Average
steps: one containing only land data, one containing only ocean data,
and one containing mixed land and ocean data as described above.

Zonal Averages.  Each hemisphere is divided into 4 zones by splitting
at the latitudes that have sines of 0.4, 0.7, 0.9 (and 0 and 1);
the latitudes of the zone boundaries are approximately 23.6, 44.4,
and 64.2 degrees.  For each zone all the cells in that zone are
combined into a single record.  Large regional averages (hemispheres,
tropics, northern- and southern-extratropics) are computed by
combining zones in various combinations, each zone weighted according
to the zone's area.  Zonal averaging is documented in Hansen and
Lebedeff 1987 and Hansen et al 2006 (each of which describes
an alternate scheme, the latter is what is currently implemented,
but relictual code exists for the former).

Global Average.  A global series is computed by combining
northern- and southern-hemisphere series, weighted equally.

Annual series are computed from their monthly counterparts.

Step 6: various visualisations are produced (only some of which we do).


A note on gridding

The grid used (in step 3 and subsequently) divides the globe into
8000 equal area cells.  It is based on the zonal scheme outlined
in Step 5 above.  There are 4 zones per hemisphere, and the choice
of sines means that the zones have areas in the ratio 4:3:2:1.  Each
zone is divided by longitude into a number of boxes proportional to the
area of the zone: 16, 12, 8, 4.  Thus there are 80 boxes, all having the
same area.  Each box is divided into 100 (10 by 10) cells each having equal
area.


REFERENCES

Hansen and Lebedeff 1987 http://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abstracts/1987/Hansen_Lebedeff.html
Hansen et al 1996 http://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abstracts/1996/Hansen_etal_1.html
Hansen et al 1999 http://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abstracts/1999/Hansen_etal.html
Hansen et al 2001 http://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abstracts/2001/Hansen_etal.html
Hansen et al 2006 http://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abstracts/2006/Hansen_etal_1.html
Hansen et al 2010 http://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/abstract.cgi?id=ha00510u

HISTORY

2010-11-19 DRJ  Updated Step 1, and fixed reference.
2010-11-19 DRJ  Created (from e-mail).
